# Challenges and pitfalls

## Challenges

The most important challenges to meet during the execution of a PoC/Pilot machine learning project are:

Challenge | Description
--- | ---
Correct scoping | Define the optimal scope for the project as an MVP (Minimum Viable Product) meeting the core objectives - convincing the customer about what can be achieved with machine learning (in case of a PoC) or providing a limited production-grade solution (in case of a Pilot). In both cases (PoC and Pilot), care should be taken to make sure the scope is the right one, given that in many situations the customer in not able to fully describe expectations/goals/objectives in this stage of the project.
Sharp focus on deliverables | Focus on delivering the [project outcomes](./defining-outcome.md). PoC/Pilot machine learning projects occur usually in the early stages of a customer's journey into machine learning (in general or in a particular class of problems). During such a stage it is common to have multiple initiatives, ideas, questions, and requests originating from the customer. It also expected these will originate from higher level business decision makers. In this context, it is often difficult to keep a sharp focus on deliverables and avoid spreading into multiple directions/initiatives.
Keep customer engaged and interested | During the inception of a PoC/Pilot machine learning project there is usually a lot of hype, interest, and engagement in the customer's organization. As time passes, these tend to fade away being replaced by other hot topics or even regular operational issues. An alert delivery pace is critical to keep the momentum of the project and prove consistent progress to the customer. A clever chaining of intermediate deliveries (e.g. cleansed data -> data with engineered features -> preliminary trained models -> optimized trained models) proves to be be highly effective as well.
Keep the relevance of the project | You should always keep a keen eye on changes affecting the customer's organization, especially on changes that have the potential of affecting the relevance of the results of your PoC/Pilot project. By their very nature, these projects are not mission-critical for the customer (especially PoCs) hence they can be easily discarded by business decision makers once the priorities of the business change. Positioning your project in the mainstream of customer business interests is always an effective strategy.
Educate the customer | You should never assume the customer's representatives fully understand what is happening in the project and what is being delivered. Make sure you educate them so they understand what and why is being delivered by the project. 
Manage customer expectations | One of your worst enemies in today's world is marketing hype. The phenomenon of mismatched and over-hyped expectations vs. somewhat more modest realities is symptomatic for modern machine learning. Always make sure you fully understand expectations from machine learning in generals and specific business cases in particular and bridge the gap between hype and reality.
Identify effective technical solutions | It is not always straightforward to identify the proper technical solution for a given problem. Often, the optimal combination of algorithms and/or hyperparameter values is not obvious. Make sure the technical solution (especially the resulting training models) is valid and properly tested/validated. This is especially true for Pilot projects as there is no worse situation than yielding production-grade machine learning results that fail the operational systems test (e.g. producing Customer Lifetime Value predictions that prove to be highly inaccurate).


## Pitfalls

The highly complex nature of machine learning projects translates into potential problems, hazards, or dangers that are easily encountered but not immediately obvious. Some of the "classical" machine learning projects pitfalls to avoid include:

Pitfall | Description
--- | ---
Excessive use of highly technical data science terms | When you communicate with the customer, avoid language mismatch (e.g. using excessively scientific terms). Hardcore data scientists have a natural tendency to use such terms and, in most cases, the receivers from the customer's organization are not comfortable in acknowledging their limited capacity to understand them. The (totally undesired) result in an apparent effective communication which is in reality a deeply flawed one.
Excessive hype | Quite often, data scientist become over-enthusiastic about various machine learning topics and open discussions about potential improvements and extensions to the project outcomes even before the initial results are delivered. This enthusiasm sometimes derails the focus of the customer from the current project and might even result in increased expectations that are not aligned with the original scope.
Confuse PoC with Pilot | The type of project (PoC or Pilot) should be clearly defined upfront and so should the differences be. Failing to ensure you have a common understanding of PoC vs. Pilot with the customer could potentially lead to issues during the final acceptance process.
Unclear scope of work | There are many cases when the customer is unable to provide clear and well defined requirement to fundament the scope of work of the project. Failing to clarify upfront the scope of the project leads to potential customer disengagement and lack of interest.
Fluid requirements | While changes are all but unavoidable in projects (and especially in machine learning projects), allowing too much fluidity in requirements can lead to never-ending stories which eventually get classified by the customer as failed or challenged (at best) projects.
Wrong assumption about the customer understanding what and why is being delivered | Assuming the customer fully understands what and why is being delivered is one of the most common pitfalls in machine learning projects. You should never assume the customer understands the same things as your team understands when describing machine learning-based outcomes. 
PoC ends up a Pilot | In the case of PoCs that live up to expectations there is often an impulse to move them into production without significant changes. Always keep in mind that PoCs tend to focus on a specific technical solution (proving that it can be done) and ignore most of not all operational requirements. You will end up either having serious operational issues or performing an extra amount of work that should have been scoped as a different project (the Pilot project). Unless there are very special circumstances, you should always avoid the implicit transformation of a PoC project into a Pilot project.
Pilot ends up delivering 80% of functionality | In some cases, after repeated change management iterations and timeline extensions, a Pilot project might end up delivering the bulk of the envisioned final set of functionalities. While this is not a bad thing in itself, you have to keep in mind the fact that the customer organization might have very different perceptions on Pilot project versus full projects. The risk you are running into is having your extensive work being labeled as pilot-grad work.
Required skills not available at right time (timing and planning fail) | By their very nature, machine learning projects require a special set of skills that must be available at the right moment during delivery. In many cases, your top data scientist(s) or data engineer(s) will be involved in multiple deliveries servicing multiple customers. In most cases, original planning will suffer multiple changes and the timely allocation of these scarce resources might prove to be challenging.
Opening too many fronts before consolidating on any of them | When a customer gets really excited about the potential o applying machine learning to address some its business pains, it often results in a large number of PoC/Pilot project ideas being discussed at the same time. There is a fine line you will need to walk between throttling customer requests and opening too many work fronts. Remember that with machine learning, one negative experience can do a lot of harm when it comes to the customer's confidence in such solutions.
Misuse of technologies | The quick pace of delivery that is typical to a PoC/Pilot machine learning project often results in improper technical decisions being taken and then being propagated in multiple iterations/projects. Eventually, the issues induced by these decisions will result in rapidly increasing numbers of problems to solve in production solutions. A typical example is the [misuse of ML pipelines](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/machine-learning/service/concept-ml-pipelines#best-practices-when-choosing-to-use-azure-ml-pipelines).
